<!DOCTYPE sect1 PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.1.2//EN"
          "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.1.2/docbookx.dtd" [
<!ENTITY nbsp "&#x00A0;">
<!ENTITY PFE '<ulink url="http://pfe.sourceforge.net">PFE</ulink>' >
<!ENTITY Tek '<ulink url="http://www.tek.com/commtest">Tek/MPT</ulink>' >
]><!-- $Id: special-implementation-strategies.dbk,v 1.3 2006-09-22 05:32:12 guidod Exp $ -->

<sect1 id="pfe-some-implementation-strategies">
<title> Special Implementation Strategies </title>

<sect2><title> Environment Vocabulary </title>

<para>
 The ansforth'94 standard describes a word to detect features
 of the forth environment. Forth scripts can use these hints to
 check whether the forth system is appropriate, and in some cases
 the script can try to use a different compilation path. However,
 the forth standard does not describe a way to extend the
 environment-hints - the 'environment?' word can only return
 the values. This is preventing a forthscript library to
 implement missing features, and advertise the newly gained
 system feature to independent application programs.
</para>

<para>
 In december 2000, the developers of gforth (Anton Ertl), win32forth
 (Tom Zimmer) and pfe (Guido U. Draheim) agreed on a common approach
 for environment-query extensions based on a proper vocabulary
 named 'environment'. The implementation of 'environment?'-queries
 is based on a 'search-wordlist'-call. If the search fails, 'false'
 is returned, if it succeeds, the returned
 execution-token is 'execute'd and a 'true' flag is placed above.
</para>
<screen><![CDATA[
 : ENVIRONMENT?
   ['] ENVIRONMENT >WORDLIST SEARCH-WORDLIST
   IF  EXECUTE TRUE ELSE  FALSE THEN ;
]]></screen>

<para>
 The environment hints themselves are implemented by adding
 word definitions to this vocabulary, in most cases these are
 'constant' or '2constant' definitions.
</para>
<screen>
 also environment definitions
 1994 constant locals-ext
 false constant /floored
 32 constant max-files
 -1 -1 2constant max-ud
 previous definitions
</screen>

<para>
 This implementation strategy allows also to place internal
 variable/values into this vocabulary that can be easily
 referenced in the actual implementation by simply placing
 the environment-vocabulary in the search-order (by using
 the name) and to let the outer interpreter see words like
 '/hold' and 'max-files' directly. In conjunction with the
 tool-ext's 'words', the user can get an overview which system
 features are available.
</para>
<screen>
 environment words ( returns: )
  C GFORTH-DIR              C SYSTEM-EXT              C CLOCKS_PER_SEC
  p PFE-DEBUG               C FORTH-83                p PFE-VERSION
  p LICENSE                 p HOST-SYSTEM             C ENVIRON-EXT
  C STRING-EXT              C TOOLS-EXT               C MEMORY-ALLOC-EXT
  C #LOCALS                 C LOCALS-EXT              p MAX-FLOAT
  p FLOATING-STACK          C FLOATING-EXT            p MAX-FILES
  C FILE-EXT                C FACILITY-EXT            C EXCEPTION-EXT
  p MAX-UD                  p MAX-D                   C DOUBLE-EXT
  C BLOCK-EXT               p RETURN-STACK-CELLS      p STACK-CELLS
  C MAX-U                   C MAX-N                   C MAX-CHAR
  C FLOORED                 C ADDRESS-UNIT-BITS       C /PAD
  C /HOLD                   C /COUNTED-STRING         C CORE-EXT
  C CHAIN-WORDLISTS         C WORDLISTS               C SEARCH-ORDER-EXT ok
</screen>

<para>
 In pfe, the reduced question is also fullfilled by an "-EXT"-hint
 in the environment-wordlist, i.e. a call like
 <screen> s" core" enviroment? .    -1 ok   </screen>
 returns true since it matches the 'core-ext' hint. This is a kind
 of convenvience behaviour.
</para>

</sect2><sect2><title> [defined] / [undefined] </title>

<para>
 Another issue in forthscripted librarysections is the question
 whether a specific word is already present. The ansforth'94 standard
 describes the precompiler-like [IF]-[ELSE]-[THEN] words, however
 it is not described how to reliably deduce flags for these. A
 discussion on comp.lang.forth revealed, that even the set of 'find'
 and 'search-wordlist' is not so strictly standardized to accomodate
 the need for these ifdef-words.
</para>

<para>
 Over time, every forth system has implemented means for a precompiler-type
 ifdef-section. In pfe, the early tek-mforth ifdefs are present in a
 seperate cdecl-ext wordset that does implement a subset of a C-compiler's
 precompiler words, including '#ifdef-#else-#endif' and '#define'. Other
 forth system have implemented '[ifdef]'-words, however these words do
 all suffer from having no easily portable implementation - with the
 greatest problem that the standard-implementation of '[if]-[else]'
 must count [if]'s and [then]'s to detect proper nesting. A system which
 had no [ifdef]'s does not see a newly-defined [ifdef] in the execution
 of [if].
</para>

<para>
 Therefore the usage of [ifdef] should be depracated. Instead an
 independent word should be used to construct the flag for [if],
 and from the reference to the Forth Programmers Handbook (FPH),
 many forth system have chosen to use the terms [defined] and
 [undefined]. Note that some systems still use 'defined' (which is
 not immediate) or 'defined?' or 'have?', or perhaps they have
  '[not]' instead of the '[undefined]'-call.
  However the pair [defined]/[undefined] has
 found widespread acceptance and it is therefore implemented
 in pfe along with the [void]-call to place a reliable immediate
 false-flag for usage by [if].
</para>
<screen><![CDATA[
 [void] [if]
    here can be any text as this if can not get true.
 [else]
    [undefined] rdrop [if] \ check for non-existance of a word
       [defined] r>drop [if] \ but found a synonym
         : rdrop postpone r>drop ; immediate
       [else]
         : rdrop r> r> drop >r ; \ this is not standard-conform
       [then]
    [then] \ the standard- bracket-if/then call is properly nested
 [then]
]]></screen>

<para>
 Although these words are not (yet) standard, with some knowledge
 about the target systems search-order implementation, a highlevel
 definition of [defined]/[undefined] can be created that does
 properly work with the system-provided [if]/[else] construct.
 About twothird of the mature forth systems do already have the
 [defined]/[undefined] pair, so that their usage is reasonably
 portable across systems, and application software can be
 assured to compile in future system implementations.
</para>

</sect2><sect2><title> state-smart over exec-only </title>

<para>
 Older forth system have often used a single word for doing both,
 exec-mode and compile-mode. In exec-mode, it would leave the
 parsed-value of the following word on the stack, while in comp-mode
 it would compile an execution-token and the value in a way that
 the value would pop up at runtime again. The ansforth'94 does
 however prefer to define two words, one for exec-mode and the other
 for comp-mode, so they are not state-smart anymore. In some
 compiling-environments (with preprocessing functionalities) this
 may eventually be a nice win, however it does sometimes confuse
 the the average forth programmer. The programmer can not anymore
 use a word on the commandline, and when satisfied enclose it into
 a ":"-";"-pair to memorize it as a colon-sequence.
</para>

<para>
 In pfe, some of the immediate or exec-only/comp-only words have
 been extended to be state-smart. Where the ansforth'94 will make
 the behaviour of the word rather undefined or not applicable,
 in pfe it is just state-smart, and it will hence behave in
 traditional ways. The traditional forth programmer has simply
 to watch out for the cases where a newly-invented word from
 the ansforth'94 standard has been overloaded instead of the
 traditional word which had somehow been defined to be just not
 state-smart.
</para>
<screen><![CDATA[
  .( whatever ) \ not state-smart, immediate
  ." whatever ) \ state-smart, orginally comp-only
  '             \ not state-smart, not immediate
  ['] name      \ not state-smart, immediate & compiles always
  '> name       \ state-smart version
  char woo      \ not state-smart, not immediate
  [char] woo    \ not state-smart, immediate & compiles always
  ascii         \ state-smart, very common in forth systems
  control       \ also state-smart and very common. Subtracts 32.
]]></screen>


</sect2>
</sect1>
